>> Researchers uncover the great
potential of a daily gratitude
practice to heal body and mind.
>> When we cultivate it and
we bring it into our conscious
awareness, then it provides a
lot of magical transformation
and healing for our lives.
>> This is Gaia News.
[THEME MUSIC]
While research in the field
of positive psychology
has shown the clear benefits
of positive attributes
such as compassion and
empathy, new studies
suggest that gratitude may
have the biggest effect of all.
Dr. Paul Mills has been studying
the effects of gratitude
as a professor at the University
of California San Diego
and as a director of research
at the Chopra Foundation.
>> The way I define gratitude is
it's a way of seeing the world
with a sense of heartfulness,
a sense of embracingness,
an appreciation for all
that is being experienced.
Typically, people differentiate
gratitude from thankfulness.
It's a response in
exchange to something.
Gratitude, really,
at its foundation,
is more of a dispositional
set where we walk around,
let's say, with gratitude for
everything that's going on,
just for really
the gift of life.
>> Over the last several
years, scientific studies
into the psychological
and physiological benefits
of gratitude have
grown exponentially.
>> I think one of the
main reasons that research
on gratitude has taken off
more than other areas that we
typically could call
positive psychology is
because the findings,
the significance in all
the studies, is so
high and impactful.
So many of the studies that
have been looking at gratitude
find more and more
significant effects related
to health and well-being.
>> Some of the more recent
studies on gratitude have
focused on the physiological
benefits to the heart.
>> And I've done a lot of
research with cardiac patients,
for example.
And it was quite significant
what we've been able to show
that those patients who
have more of a state
of dispositional gratitude--
sometimes it's called carrying
around an attitude of gratitude
where we feel grateful
for pretty much everything
and anything going on--
despite what it might be
to other people's eyes,
that has a profound
effect on these patients.
They sleep better.
They have more energy.
And we found that
those patients who
had been doing the
gratitude journaling,
they had a significant reduction
in inflammatory markers
in the blood.
There's approximately
23% reduction
in five different
biomarkers of inflammation
in over a two-month period.
This is a striking,
amazing finding.
You would never anticipate
anything like that, even
with medications.
>> Other recent studies have
shown the important role
gratitude plays
in mental health.
>> And we were studying
people who have what's called
persistent mental disorder.
And specifically, it was
through the recovery process
of getting better when
they had a acute breakdown,
and this included
people who have
depression, major
anxiety, bipolar disorder,
and schizophrenia.
And what we found is
that gratitude as well
as compassion, as well as
a sense of connectedness
in the world, very much
supported their recovery
through this process of
getting over their disease
and getting back
to a stable state.
>> Just how does gratitude
exert this powerful effect?
>> It provides us a sense
of connection with not only
ourselves but the
world around us.
And when we have more of
a sense of connection,
we feel more at home.
We feel less stressed.
We feel less depressed.
There have been several
EEG studies looking
at the frequencies
of the brain waves,
and there have been some
fMRI studies looking
at the structure of the brain
and then just the functional
activity of the brain.
And it's very interesting.
These studies have
been showing again
and again there are differences.
So gratitude does change the
behavior and the activity
of parts of our brain, and
then, structurally, there's
evidence for that too.
>> Dr. Mills suggests gratitude
journaling as a great way
to build a regular practice.
>> The easiest route would
be buy yourself a journal
and begin to spend some time
every day just writing down
things you're grateful for.
Over time, maybe you
don't get your journal,
but just stop and reflect
and have that in your mind,
what am I grateful for?
And that will begin
to change your life.
I'm convinced of it.
The evidence has again
and again been shown.
And in my own life, it's
been very transformative.
>> For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.